Contents
•	1Introduction
o	1.1Origins
o	
•	2File formats
o	2.1Filename extensions
o	2.2Binary formats (Word 97–2007)
o	2.3XML Document (Word 2003)
o	2.4Cross-version compatibility
o	2.5Third-party formats
•	3Features and flaws
o	3.1Templates
o	3.2Image formats
o	3.3WordArt
o	3.4Macros
o	3.5Layout issues
o	3.6Bullets and numbering
o	3.7AutoSummarize
o	3.8Shortcut Keys
•	4Word for the web
•	5Password protection
•	6Reception
•	7Release history
•	8References
•	9Further reading
•	10External links

MICROSOFT WORD
Microsoft Word Components
Before you get started with Microsoft Word (commonly referred to as MS Word), you will need to 
locate and open it from the computer. It may be on your desktop. 
 
From the computer desktop: 
Double-click on the MS Word icon 
       or
Go to the Start menu if the MS Word icon is not on the desktop or in task bar: 
Click ►Start ►Programs ►Microsoft Word* 

Title Bar
This display the title of the application running in the window, and the title of the working document. 
Notice the three buttons on the right side, controlling program features. Remember that the X button 
on the far right means close the program, the middle button is a toggle switch between full screen 
and a small window, and the single line button on the left means minimize to the task bar. 
 

The Menu Bar
The Menu Bar is a common sight in almost all Microsoft Windows programs. It features text-based 
menus, on which are listed virtually every option. Each menu expands when clicked (with the left 
mouse button), offering many options categorized by specific tasks. This menu is also customizable 
to offer a more personalized experience for the user.  
 
   You can click on each of the words to see a menu of the tasks you can perform. 
 
To see a menu: 
1. Point with your mouse to a menu option.
2. Click the left mouse button once to open list of commands in the toolbar.
3. Point with your mouse to a particular item 
4. Click once with the left mouse button to select the item 
 
Toolbar
They appear in many programs and provide quick ways to do tasks. Most toolbar buttons 
corresponds to a menu command.
 The function of each button can be shown by resting the mouse pointer over the button; a box, 
known as a tooltip, appears, displaying the name of the button. 

The Ruler  
The ruler is generally found below the main toolbars. The ruler tells you where you are on the page, 
along with the dimensions of the overall document. Just like a real-world piece of paper, the default 
setting is 8.5 x 11 inches, and margins have been incorporated for you. Similar to most options in 
MS Word, this is entirely customizable and the user can create documents of any dimension. 
 
Scroll Bar
Some windows and dialog box have several scroll bars that can be used to view text that cannot fit 
into the window. The scroll bar is a narrow strip located along the right or bottom border of the 
window with a small box for scrolling. A window may have both vertical and horizontal scroll bars as 
required. To scroll information displayed in the appropriate scroll box is dragged in the desired 
direction. 
Status Bar
       This is normally the last line at the bottom of every window; it displays information about the 
active document such as number of pages, current page, current position of a cursor, number of 
character in the document, zooming slide and so on.




 
Formatting
       Changing the look of what you’ve written is called “formatting”. This can include 
changing the text style, size, color, and more. 
       You can also make bold, underline, or italicize when using MS Word. These features do 
not have to be used independently of each other either – in other words, you can make bold, 
underline, and italicize a single piece of t ext. 
       To make text really stand out, you can also combine this with alignment and size to produce 
a heading in bold, italics, underlined, sized and centered:  
Sale at Bob’s Paint Supplies! 

       In order to apply certain stylistic or other changes to text, you must first HIGHLIGHT the text. 
This is a common procedure in Microsoft Windows applications, and like being able to successfully 
navigate the mouse around your screen, the ability to highlight well is one that you want to master. 
To highlight text, you start by placing your cursor (by moving the mouse) directly to one side of the 
selection that you are working with. In the case above, the user wants to highlight the phrase “This is 
a test” but NOT “to show.” In this example, the user should place the cursor directly to the left of the 
word “This” and hold down the left-click button on the mouse. 
       Then, drag the mouse across the sentence, and a black highlight will follow. The computer 
now understands that any and all formatting that you command will ONLY apply to the part of the 
sentence that you highlighted (and not “to show,” since it is not highlighted). 
This is a test to show 
Suppose we wanted to make the words “This is a test” bold, and leave the rest of the sentence 
unformatted. The end result (once you click elsewhere on the screen to remove the highlight) would 
be this: 
       Experimenting with formatting can be fun, and it is an essential tool to master in MS Word. 
You can also change the font color by clicking on the appropriate buttons in the Formatting Toolbar. 
Experiment and remember – you can always start over with a fresh, new document, so don’t worry 
about making mistakes! If you do, however, there is always the incredible “UNDO” tool. 
 
Deleting Text 
       While typing a document, you may make a mistake. Unlike a typewriter, MS Word can delete 
text on the screen that leaves no residue – it is as if you never typed on the page in the first place. 
       A common source of confusion for users is understanding the difference between the 
“Delete” key and the “Backspace” key (#1 and #2 on the keyboard map on page 6). Put simply, the 
“Backspace” key deletes words to the LEFT of the cursor, and the “Delete” key deletes words to the 
RIGHT of the cursor. 
 
This is my awe | some sentence. 
 
BACKSPACE 	 	 	 	 	 	 	DELETE 
 
Let’s assume that the vertical line dissecting the word “awesome” in the example above is our 
cursor. Pressing the “Backspace” key will erase “e,” “w,” “a” and so on, moving LEFT. 
The “Delete” key will erase “s,” “o,” “m,” and so on, moving RIGHT. 

Undo and Redo 
The UNDO and REDO features of Microsoft Windows applications are great tools to rely on 
(especially in MS Word). The program will keep a list of the last 25 commands that you have 
performed, and it will allow for taking “one step” backwards in order to erase what you have just 
done. 
It is a common thought that life itself should have an UNDO feature. ☺
1.	Click ►Edit ►Undo from the Menu Bar to go back one step (up to 25) 
2.	Click ►Edit ►Redo from the Menu Bar to go forward one step (up to 25) 
3.	
Copying, Cutting, and Pasting Text 
In MS Word, you can CUT or COPY text from one area of the document and save that text so it can 
be PASTED elsewhere in the document. 
When you CUT text, you actually delete it from where you took it, as opposed to COPYING it, which 
makes, naturally, a carbon copy of your selection. (CUTTING a  selection will also make a copy of it, 
just in case you want to PASTE it elsewhere.) 
When you CUT or COPY text, it is stored on what is known as the CLIPBOARD.  The Clipboard 
is a tool in MS Word that you can use to stash away cuts and copies of your work, to be in pasted 
in other places in the document. Once your selection is on the CLIPBOARD, you can PASTE it as 
many times as you want! 
To CUT a selection, first highlight it. Then, click ►Edit ►Cut from the Menu Bar. The 
highlighted text will disappear, as you have just cut it out (but a copy is now on your clipboard) 
and MS Word is waiting for you to paste it somewhere else. 
To PASTE this cut selection somewhere else on the page, place your cursor where you want the 
selection to go. Click ►Edit ►Paste from the menu bar, and it will pop into place, right where your 
cursor is. 
To COPY, simply follow those same steps, replacing the CUT command with COPY. You will 
notice immediately that the COPY command will not alter your original selection at all, as it is 
simply making a copy of it. 
***Always remember to highlight the selection! MS Word will not 
allow you to CUT, COPY or PASTE unless you have 
highlighted something first!*** 

Spelling and Grammar Check 
One of the benefits of using a computerized word processor is that of its ability to recognize, change 
and give advice about what you are writing. MS Word has utilities that can check your spelling and 
grammar against a master database, and can offer advice on a variety of different grammatical 
styles. 
MS Word automatically underlines any words that it does not recognize in red, assuming that they 
are not spelled right, and green if it does not recognize the grammar, assuming that the sentence 
does not make logical sense. For example: 
The dogs is always blac. 
 
 
 
In this case, “dogs is” should read “dogs are” and “blac” should be “black.” If you rightclick on the 
word, a menu will pop up with options, including “Ignore” if you do not want help on this specific 
phrase.  

Printing Documents 
To print your MS Word document: 
Click ►File ►Print from the Menu Bar and a Print window will pop up on the screen. Click 
►OK for your document to start printing. 
 
As with all commands in MS Word, you can make changes along the way. From the 
Print menu, you can alter how many copies will be made, in what order the pages will be 
and much more. 
Another useful tool is the Print Preview function found alongside the Print command. 
This will allow you to look over an exact copy of what will come out of the printer before 
actually executing the print command. It is especially useful when experimenting with 
altered margins and page dimensions, and can help to conserve paper.

To print your MS Word document: 
Click ►File ►Print from the Menu Bar and a Print window will pop up on the screen. Click ►OK for 
your document to start printing.  
As with all commands in MS Word, you can make changes along the way. From the Print menu, 
you can alter how many copies will be made, in what order the pages will be and much more. 
Another useful tool is the Print Preview function found alongside the Print command. This will 
allow you to look over an exact copy of what will come out of the printer before actually executing 
the print command. It is especially useful when experimenting with altered margins and page 
dimensions, and can help to conserve paper. 
 

Saving Documents 
       When you finish typing and want to leave the computer, it is important to save your work 
(even if you are printing a hard copy—saving should be a reflex). To save your work in MS 
There are many places in which you can save a file, some of which are portable and some of which 
are immobile. 
       The My Documents folder on your computer’s hard drive is a good place to store your 
documents. A blank CD (compact disc) is a great portable storage device and can contain a LOT of 
data.  
       It is important to note that every consequent command of SAVE will overwrite your original 
file, creating the most up-to-date version.  
If you want to save the changed document without destroying the original one: In the Menu 
Bar, click ►File ►Save As from the menu bar and give your document a new filename 
(unique from the original). 
 
To bring a saved document back up on the screen from MS Word: Click 
►File ►Open from the Menu Bar. 
 
Locate where the file is located (which folder, that is) and click on the filename of the document you 
want.  
Click ►Open. 
 
Closing Microsoft Word 
When you are finished  
Click ►File ►Exit from the menu bar 
OR 
Click on the X in the top right corner of the computer screen. 
As you become more and more comfortable with the program, it is always helpful to continue to 
experiment with options that you come across – sometimes, you can uncover a tool that would 
have stayed hidden – and you can improve proficiency by learning the fine details of the 
program.  

TEMPLATE
Several later versions of Word include the ability for users to create their own formatting templates, 
allowing them to define a file in which the title, heading, paragraph, and other element designs differ 
from the standard Word templates. Users can find how to do this under the Help section located 
near the top right corner (Word 2013 on Windows 8).
For example, Normal.dot is the master template from which all Word documents are created. It 
determines the margin defaults as well as the layout of the text and font defaults. Although 
normal.dot is already set with certain defaults, the user can change normal.dot to new defaults. This 
will change other documents which were created using the template, usually in unexpected ways.
Image formats
Word can import and display images in common bitmap formats such as JPG and GIF. It can also 
be used to create and display simple line-art. Microsoft Word added support[82] for the 
common SVG vector image format in 2017 for Office 365 ProPlus subscribers and this functionality 
was also included in the Office 2019 release.
WordArt
Main article: WordArt
 
An example image created with WordArt
WordArt enables drawing text in a Microsoft Word document such as a title, watermark, or other text, 
with graphical effects such as skewing, shadowing, rotating, stretching in a variety of shapes and 
colors and even including three-dimensional effects. Users can apply formatting effects such as 
shadow, bevel, glow, and reflection to their document text as easily as applying bold or underline. 
Users can also spell-check text that uses visual effects, and add text effects to paragraph styles.
Macros
A Macro is a rule of pattern that specifies how a certain input sequence (often a sequence of 
characters) should be mapped to an output sequence according to a defined process. Frequently 
used or repetitive sequences of keystrokes and mouse movements can be automated. Like 
other Microsoft Office documents, Word files can include advanced macros and even embedded 
programs. The language was originally WordBasic, but changed to Visual Basic for Applications as 
of Word 97.
This extensive functionality can also be used to run and propagate viruses in documents. The 
tendency for people to exchange Word documents via email, USB flash drives, and floppy 
disks made this an especially attractive vector in 1999. A prominent example was the Melissa virus, 
but countless others have existed.
These macro viruses were the only known cross-platform threats between Windows and Macintosh 
computers and they were the only infection vectors to affect any macOS system up until the advent 
of video codec trojans in 2007. Microsoft released patches for Word X and Word 2004 that 
effectively eliminated the macro problem on the Mac by 2006.
Word's macro security setting, which regulates when macros may execute, can be adjusted by the 
user, but in the most recent versions of Word, it is set to HIGH by default, generally reducing the risk 
from macro-based viruses, which have become uncommon.
Create or run a macro
To save time on tasks you do often, bundle the steps into a macro. First, you record the macro. Then 
you can run the macro by clicking a button on the Quick Access Toolbar or pressing a combination 
of keys. It depends on how you set it up.
Record a macro with a button

1.	Click View > Macros > Record Macro.
 
2.	Type a name for the macro.
 
3.	To use this macro in any new documents you make, be sure the Store macro in box says 
All Documents (Normal.dotm).
 
4.	To run your macro when you click a button, click Button.
 
5.	Click the new macro (it’s named something like Normal.NewMacros.<your macro name>), 
and click Add.
 
6.	Click Modify.
 
7.	Choose a button image, type the name you want, and click OK twice.
 
8.	Now it’s time to record the steps. Click the commands or press the keys for each step in the 
task. Word records your clicks and keystrokes.
Note: Use the keyboard to select text while you’re recording your macro. Macros don’t 
record selections made with a mouse.
9.	To stop recording, click View > Macros > Stop Recording.
 
The button for your macro appears on the Quick Access Toolbar.
 
To run the macro, click the button.
Record a macro with a keyboard shortcut

1.	Click View > Macros > Record Macro.
 
2.	Type a name for the macro.
 
3.	To use this macro in any new documents you make, be sure the Store macro in box says 
All Documents (Normal.dotm).
 
4.	To run your macro when you press a keyboard shortcut, click Keyboard.
 
5.	Type a combination of keys in the Press new shortcut key box.
6.	Check to see whether that combination’s already assigned to something else. If it's already 
assigned, try a different combination.
7.	To use this keyboard shortcut in any new documents you make, be sure the Save changes 
in box says Normal.dotm.
8.	Click Assign.
9.	Now it’s time to record the steps. Click the commands or press the keys for each step in the 
task. Word records your clicks and keystrokes.
Note: Use the keyboard to select text while you’re recording your macro. Macros don’t 
record selections made with a mouse.
10.	To stop recording, click View > Macros > Stop Recording.
 
To run the macro, press the keyboard shortcut keys.
Run a macro

To run a macro, click the button on the Quick Access Toolbar, press the keyboard shortcut, or you 
can run the macro from the Macros list.
1.	Click View > Macros > View Macros.
 
2.	In the list under Macro name, click the macro you want to run.
3.	Click Run.
Make a macro available in all documents

To make a macro from one document available in all new documents, add it to the Normal.dotm 
template.
1.	Open the document that contains the macro.
2.	Click View > Macros > View Macros.
 
3.	Click Organizer.
 
4.	Click the macro you want to add to the Normal.dotm template, and click Copy.
Add a macro button to the ribbon

1.	Click File > Options > Customize Ribbon.
2.	Under Choose commands from, click Macros.
3.	Click the macro you want.
4.	Under Customize the ribbon, click the tab and custom group where you want to add the 
macro.
If you don't have a custom group, click New Group. Then click Rename and type a name for your 
custom group.
1.	Click Add.
2.	Click Rename to choose an image for the macro and type the name you want.
3.	Click OK twice.

Write a macro from scratch in Visual Basic
1.	On the Developer tab, in the Code group, click Macros.
2.	In the Macro name box, type a name for the macro.
Note: If you give a new macro the same name as a built-in macro in Word, the new macro 
actions will replace the built-in macro. To view a list of built-in macros, click Word 
Commands in the Macros in list.
3.	In the Macros in list, click the template or document in which you want to store the macro.
To make your macro available in all documents, be sure to click Normal.dotm.
4.	Click Create to open the Visual Basic Editor.
5.	After you open the Visual Basic Editor, you may want more information about working with 
Visual Basic for Applications. For more information, click Microsoft Visual Basic Help on 
the Help menu or press [2]

Layout issues
Before Word 2010 (Word 14) for Windows, the program was unable to correctly 
handle ligatures defined in OpenType fonts.[83] Those ligature glyphs with Unicode codepoints may 
be inserted manually, but are not recognized by Word for what they are, breaking spell checking, 
while custom ligatures present in the font are not accessible at all. Since Word 2010, the program 
now has advanced typesetting features which can be enabled:[84] OpenType ligatures,[85] kerning, 
and hyphenation (previous versions already had the latter two features). Other layout deficiencies of 
Word include the inability to set crop marks or thin spaces. Various third-party workaround utilities 
have been developed.[86]
In Word 2004 for Mac OS X, support of complex scripts was inferior even to Word 97,[87] and Word 
2004 did not support Apple Advanced Typography features like ligatures or glyph variants.[88]
Bullets and numbering
Microsoft Word supports bullet lists and numbered lists. It also features a numbering system that 
helps add correct numbers to pages, chapters, headers, footnotes, and entries of tables of content; 
these numbers automatically change to correct ones as new items are added or existing items are 
deleted. Bullets and numbering can be applied directly to paragraphs and convert them to 
lists.[89] Word 97 through 2003, however, had problems adding correct numbers to numbered lists. In 
particular, a second irrelevant numbered list might have not started with number one but instead 
resumed numbering after the last numbered list. Although Word 97 supported a hidden marker that 
said the list numbering must restart afterward, the command to insert this marker (Restart 
Numbering command) was only added in Word 2003. However, if one were to cut the first item of the 
listed and paste it as another item (e.g. fifth), then the restart marker would have moved with it and 
the list would have restarted in the middle instead of at the top.[90]
Users can also create tables in Word. Depending on the version, Word can perform simple 
calculations — along with support for formulas and equations as well.
AutoSummarize
Available in certain versions of Word (e.g., Word 2007), AutoSummarize highlights passages or 
phrases that it considers valuable and can be a quick way of generating a crude abstract or an 
executive summary.[91] The amount of text to be retained can be specified by the user as a 
percentage of the current amount of text.
According to Ron Fein of the Word 97 team, AutoSummarize cuts wordy copy to the bone by 
counting words and ranking sentences. First, AutoSummarize identifies the most common words in 
the document (barring "a" and "the" and the like) and assigns a "score" to each word – the more 
frequently a word is used, the higher the score. Then, it "averages" each sentence by adding the 
scores of its words and dividing the sum by the number of words in the sentence – the higher the 
average, the higher the rank of the sentence. "It's like the ratio of wheat to chaff," explains Fein.[92]
AutoSummarize was removed from Microsoft Word for Mac OS X 2011, although it was present in 
Word for Mac 2008. AutoSummarize was removed from the Office 2010 release version (14) as 
well.[93]
Word for the web
Further information: Microsoft Office § Office on the web
Word for the web is a free lightweight version of Microsoft Word available as part of Office on the 
web, which also includes web versions of Microsoft Excel and Microsoft PowerPoint.
Word for the web lacks some Ribbon tabs, such as Design and Mailings. Mailings allows users to 
print envelopes and labels, and manage mail merge printing of Word documents. Word for the web 
is not able to edit certain objects, such as equations, shapes, text boxes, or drawings, but a 
placeholder may be present in the document. Certain advanced features like table sorting or 
columns will not be displayed but are preserved as they were in the document. Other views available 
in the Word desktop app (Outline, Draft, Web Layout, and Full Screen Reading) are not available, 
nor are side-by-side viewing, split windows, and the ruler.
Password protection
Main article: Microsoft Office password protection
There are three password types that can be set in Microsoft Word:
•	Password to open a document
•	Password to modify a document
•	Password restricting formatting and editing
The second and the third type of passwords were developed by Microsoft for convenient shared use 
of documents rather than for their protection. There is no encryption of documents that are protected 
by such passwords, and the Microsoft Office protection system saves a hash sum of a password in a 
document's header where it can be easily accessed and removed by the specialized 
software. Password to open a document offers much tougher protection that had been steadily 
enhanced in the subsequent editions of Microsoft Office.
Word 95 and all the preceding editions had the weakest protection that utilized a conversion of a 
password to a 16-bit key.
Key length in Word 97 and 2000 was strengthened up to 40 bit. However, modern cracking software 
allows removing such a password very quickly – a persistent cracking process takes one week at 
most. Use of rainbow tables reduces password removal time to several seconds. Some password 
recovery software can not only remove a password but also find an actual password that was used 
by a user to encrypt the document using brute-force attack approach. Statistically, the possibility of 
recovering the password depends on the password strength.
Word's 2003/XP version default protection remained the same but an option that allowed advanced 
users choosing a Cryptographic Service Provider was added. If a strong CSP is chosen, guaranteed 
document decryption becomes unavailable, and therefore a password can't be removed from the 
document. Nonetheless, a password can be fairly quickly picked with a brute-force attack, because 
its speed is still high regardless of the CSP selected. Moreover, since the CSPs are not active by 
default, their use is limited to advanced users only.
Word 2007 offers significantly more secure document protection which utilizes the modern Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES) that converts a password to a 128-bit key using a SHA-1 hash function 
50000 times. It makes password removal impossible (as of today, no computer that can pick the key 
in a reasonable amount of time exists), and drastically slows the brute-force attack speed down to 
several hundreds of passwords per second.
Word's 2010 protection algorithm was not changed apart from the increasing number of SHA-1 
conversions up to 100000 times, and consequently, the brute-force attack speed decreased two 
times more.

 
(WIKIPEDIA 2021)
(Burke County Library 2009)
8 
18 
© BCPLS  9/17/2009  PEMA 


